Scalable and robust DNA-based storage via
coding theory and deep learning
Daniella Bar-Lev  1,3 , Itai Orr  1,2,3 , Omer Sabary1,3 , Tuvi Etzion1
 &
Eitan Yaakobi1
The global data sphere is expanding exponentially, projected to hit
180 zettabytes by 2025, whereas current technologies are not anticipated
to scale at nearly the same rate. DNA-based storage emerges as a crucial
solution to this gap, enabling digital information to be archived in DNA
molecules. This method enjoys major advantages over magnetic and optical
storage solutions such as exceptional information density, enhanced data
durability and negligible power consumption to maintain data integrity.
To access the data, an information retrieval process is employed, where
some of the main bottlenecks are the scalability and accuracy, which have
a natural tradeoff between the two. Here we show a modular and holistic
approach that combines deep neural networks trained on simulated
data, tensor product-based error-correcting codes and a safety margin
mechanism into a single coherent pipeline. We demonstrated our solution
on 3.1 MB of information using two different sequencing technologies.
Our work improves upon the current leading solutions with a 3,200× increase
in speed and a 40% improvement in accuracy and offers a code rate of 1.6 bits
per base in a high-noise regime. In a broader sense, our work shows a viable
path to commercial DNA storage solutions hindered by current information
retrieval processes.
There is unsustainable growth in the global data sphere, fuelled
by the proliferation of digital technologies such as artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things, widespread internet connectivity
and the growing number of interconnected devices. While the global
data sphere is anticipated to reach 180 zettabytes by 2025, current
storage solutions are not expected to scale at nearly the same pace
owing to capacity limitations1
. To address this urgent need of the
digital age, researchers are turning to innovative solutions such
as DNA-based storage, recognizing its potential to revolutionize
long-term data storage capabilities by offering extraordinary data
density and durability2,3
.
A DNA molecule consists of four building blocks called nucleotides: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G) and thymine (T). A DNA
strand, or oligonucleotide, is an ordered sequence of nucleotides,
represented as a string over the alphabet {A,C,G,T}. The ability to
chemically synthesize almost any possible strand makes it possible to
store digital data on DNA molecules.
The standard in vitro DNA-based storage pipeline consists of several steps and is shown in Fig. 1a. First, the binary data are encoded
into sequences over the DNA 4-ary alphabet, which are referred to as
encoded sequences. Next, the encoded sequences are synthesized
by a DNA synthesizer. Since current synthesis technologies cannot
produce one single strand per sequence, multiple DNA strands (known
as oligos) are produced per encoded sequence. Moreover, the length
of the strands produced by the synthesizer is typically bounded by
roughly 200–300 nucleotides to sustain an acceptable error rate4
.
The synthesized strands are then stored in a storage container in an
unordered manner. To access the data, a sample of the strands is taken
from the storage container, amplified using PCR and then sequenced by
a DNA sequencer. The sequencer processes the strands and generates
Received: 12 June 2024
Accepted: 23 January 2025
Published online: 21 February 2025
 Check for updates
